# team-market

Our group members include: Jacob Brawer, Owen Rosebeck, and myself. The title of our intended project is "Using NLP on Lyrics to Predict Song Popularity in the Billboard Top 100 from 1958 - 2019".
 
For our project, we found two very interesting datasets that we'd like to explore together. First, we found a dataset from MetroLyrics with 380,000+ song lyrics with artist, year, song, genre, and lyrics. We also have data on the Billboard Hot Weekly Top 100 charts from 1958 - 2019. We plan to do two things with our project. First, we'd like to use natural language processing to identify common lyrics and words in songs that have been in the top 100 charts over the years. Second, we'd like to create a neat visualization of lyric word popularity over time. Some questions we can ask are: Are there certain words or types of words in lyrics that increase that song's presence in the Billboard Top 100? How have "popular" lyrics changed over time from 1958 to 2019? Given all of our lyrics, could we predict whether a song from our dataset lands in the Billboard Top 100? Can we go even further to predict which quartile of the Top 100 that song would be in, and how the top 100 songs move throughout a time period?
 
Both datasets are Kaggle Datasets. The song lyric dataset can be found (https://www.kaggle.com/gyani95/380000-lyrics-from-metrolyrics) and the Billboard Top 100 dataset can be found (https://data.world/kcmillersean/billboard-hot-100-1958-2017). The song lyric dataset gives variables such as song (string), year (integer), artist (string), genre (string), and lyrics (string). The lyric data come in long strings, which is why using NLP will be useful. The Billboard Top 100 dataset gives variables such as week ID (date), week position (integer), song (string), and performer (string). We will combine these datasets to get observations of songs that overlap between the two datasets in order to find "popular" lyrics and address our questions above.
 
As a final product, we hope to create a framework for analyzing song lyrics and a model that can apply that framework in order to analyze song popularity patterns based on the Billboard Top 100. We also plan to create myriad visualizations of song lyric popularity over time and create a model that can predict which songs would be top 100 based on their lyrics, within certain time periods (such as the 80s vs the 2000s).

In terms of group dynamic roles, I will be the project manager, Jacob will be the task manager, and Owen will be the facilitator. As project manager, I will schedule weekly meetings and make sure the group knows our weekly goals and that each member consistently contributes to these goals. As task manager, Jacob will constantly check in on each group member to determine their progress and what they need to do before the next group meeting. As facilitator, Owen will make sure each group member is participating and being listened to.

For project roles, Owen will be the director of research, Jacob will be the director of computation, and I will be the reporter. Owen will research previous literature done on song popularity analysis (mostly has been done based on instrumental frequencies) and how NLP is implemented and what frameworks have been used in the past for analyzing songs, books, poems, etc. Jacob will be responsible for the computer programs involved, specifically in terms of designing the code outline needed for cleaning, pre-processing, and aggregating the data, as well as implementing the NLP framework. Jacob will assign coding tasks for each member based on this outline. As the reporter, I will be responsible for keeping track of everything being done and taking notes on each task we work on, in order to communicate our work and findings, as well as theorize the conclusions and visualizations that best interpret our results. I will make sure all written pieces flow nicely and all thoroughly contribute to our end product. These are the general roles, but every member will overlap as necessary.
 
We're really looking forward to working on this project!